There's a phrase which China's president
Xi Jinping likes to use.
The world is undergoing changes which
have not been seen in a hundred years.
Now, these changes have appeared to
arrive, but they're delivered
unexpectedly by Donald Trump.
Epic
fury. I said I like that name.
Amid the noise of war, the stance of
another major power is speaking volumes.
The US is demonstrating itself to be a
force for instability in the world. And
that gives President Xi and China a
chance to present themselves as the
adults in the room. China is happy to
see the United States getting bogged
down in the Middle [music] East. China
has long viewed the existing order as
being too dominated by the US.
>> [music]
>> So, Trump's challenges to that order
actually presents Xi Jinping a very good
opportunity. And the question is whether
Xi is ready to seize it.
In many ways, he already has. Trump's
first trade war made China realize that
dependence on the US is [music] a very
dangerous thing. China's exports to the
US fell about 20% last [music] year, but
in the end China had a record trade
surplus hitting 1.2 trillion US dollars.
China deliberately [music]
tried to diversify away from the US as a
consumer [music] base. So, do Trump's
actions strengthen China or expose it to
more risk it cannot control?
The US-China relationship is the most
important bilateral relationship in the
world, and it will help define the
century.
And it's in the hands of two very
different leaders.
It's hard to imagine
two people with more different
approaches to leadership. President
Trump is brash. He's impulsive. You
don't have the cards right now.
Xi Jinping is guarded, methodical,
someone who plays the long game, not the
Twitter game.
China's policy makers see Trump as
someone [music] who's transactional and
pragmatic, who likes to make deals. They
also realize that Trump is very
unpredictable.
President Trump makes a lot of threats.
What the markets have realized is that
he doesn't execute all of those threats.
A lot of them are just quietly
forgotten.
And the internet, as usual, has found a
name for it. Taco. Taco. Taco. Taco, as
you would call it. Trump always chickens
out. The term is actually pretty popular
on Chinese social media, too.
On Chinese social media, people love
Donald Trump. He actually has
>> [music]
>> many nicknames. Another really popular
nickname for Trump is
>> [music]
>> which actually means Trump the nation
builder.
That's not praising Trump as a nation
builder for the United States. [music]
It's more like a Trump helping China to
become a superpower.
We're seeing Xi is basically just
[music] sitting back to enjoy the
benefits as a flurry of Western leaders
coming [music] to Beijing. Mark Carney
meets Xi Jinping in Beijing.
>> It's vital that we build a more
sophisticated relationship. They know
that China, [music] like all nation
states, will act in its own
self-interest. What they are seeking and
signaling is a hedge against the United
States which they now view as an
unreliable partner.
And China has learned this the hard way.
China was really caught off guard by
Trump's first trade war because it was
launched just months after his first
[music] visit to China, where he
received a lavish welcome.
So, since then, it has been preparing
itself.
In China, there's a famous saying,
"Learning is like sailing upstream.
Pause, and you're pushed back."
And this mindset now shapes Beijing's
[music] strategy in the second trade
war.
President Trump tried to deal a knockout
blow to China.
What the US wasn't expecting was that
China would hit back. China retaliated
on the US with tariffs of 125%. [music]
>> China has learned how to play this game,
and President Trump knows that. This
latest headline coming in from the
Supreme Court, global tariffs struck
down. China says it is assessing
President Trump's second tariff [music]
investigation this week as the US
continues its effort to rebuild the key
trade policy.
The roller coaster has had an impact.
Last year, China's [music] exports to
the US fell about 20%,
but if you look at India, they jumped
12.8%.
To Southeast [music] Asian countries,
they rose 13.5%.
And to the EU, up 8.4%. [music]
But trade flows are just one arm of
China's strategy. Explicit export
controls on rare earth magnets.
>> [music]
>> Rare earth materials is the Trump card.
China imposed [music] export controls on
seven types of rare earth minerals and
magnets [music] made of them. These
export controls are really inflicting
pain on the US manufacturing base
because these rare earth magnets are
used in everything from iPhones and EVs
to big-ticket weapons like fighter jets
[music] and missiles.
The pain goes beyond US manufacturers,
since producers around the world are
impacted by these controls. And although
these measures could backfire as
countries [music] explore ways to lessen
their reliance on China,
those efforts will take time.
China dominates the supply chain, mining
over 60% of the world's rare earths and
refining over 90% of them.
Rare earth by themselves [music] are not
big deals. The entire category, the
market cap was not even 10 billion US
[music] dollars. As a result, other
countries, they have pretty much given
up on rare earth production and refinery
process.
China has its own advantages.
Its labor cost is really low, [music]
and its environmental standards are
pretty lax.
The rare earth industry has been
considered strategic [music] for
decades.
China has the world's most complete uh
industrial catalogs.
But despite the trade wins against
Trump, China has issues its industrial
success can't fix. Beijing set a GDP
growth target of 4.5 to 5% for the year.
That's the lowest since 1991.
China's economy has a lot of really
serious problems. Local governments,
businesses, real estate developers, they
borrowed too much, and they used those
borrowed funds to build too much
capacity.
Bridges to nowhere.
Steel mills producing more steel than
anyone could ever need. Ghost towns of
empty property.
As a result of that overcapacity, China
now has a deflation problem. For years,
China's economic rise has been fueled
[music] by its booming exports and
investment. But last year, we saw
China's fixed asset investment decline
for the first time on record. [music]
So, it's really just the exports that
keep the economy going.
>> [music]
>> Chinese workers are seeing their pay
cuts or even getting fired [music] and
struggling to find jobs. Some of them
choose to go into the gig economy, which
doesn't really provide a sense of job
security. What a lot of countries
realized was that China was actually
exporting its deflation overseas.
Whatever they couldn't dump to the
United States, they were dumping to
Southeast Asia, Latin America, or
Europe.
That complicates the relationships China
is forging,
even as more countries engage China to
hedge against [music] an unreliable US.
China has been keen to assert its
economic strength for political
influence, but it's not willing to
[music] get entangled in military
conflicts far from home. Seizure of
Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro.
Iran [music] continues to attack its
Gulf neighbors.
China certainly has never [music]
committed to put troops on the ground to
defend Venezuela or Iran.
There's a lesson there
>> [music]
>> which other friends of China are going
to take away from that.
For Iran and Venezuela, [music]
China is their most important economic
lifeline. But for China, these two
countries are ultimately not that
important. Iran accounts for about 13 to
40% of China's oil imports, [music] and
Venezuela only accounts for 4%. So, this
is not a small number, but it is [music]
replaceable for China. But the bigger
problem here is the Strait of Hormuz.
If Iran continues to close down the
strait, [music] then China will have a
problem sourcing nearly half of its oil
imports.
The Strait of Hormuz is a vital lifeline
for 20% of the world's gas and oil
flows.
The reduction in traffic increases the
threat of an inflation crisis and global
recession.
If this war drags on and spread to other
countries, then China's economic
interests can be threatened.
So, for now, China seems focused on only
fighting the trade war, an arena where
it holds more advantages.
The United States is the world's biggest
economy. It has the world's most
powerful military.
Is China quite the equal of the United
States? I think the answer on that, at
least for now, is still no.
For nations caught in the middle,
there's really only one way forward.
Hedging will be the keyword for [music]
2026 or 2027.
When two superpowers [music]
are having this historical fight, they
want you to take sides, but no one wants
to.